Instructions
### Introduction to Scientific Writing

> Writing a scientific report is not entirely different from other types of writing.  Thoughts flow in a logical order and statements are supported by other published works.  Perhaps different then some other types of writing, scientific writing should be succinct and statements of opinion or feelings should be avoided unless supported by empirically collected data or previously published peer-reviewed work.  The purpose of scientific report writing is to communicate new knowledge.  This includes why a study was done, its significance to forwarding human knowledge, and the specific hypothesis or inquiry.  It describes how the question or hypothesis was addressed, what data were collected, and what conclusions can be drawn from the results.  Finally, a scientific report describes what the results teach us, how the findings relate to our previous knowledge, and what other inquiries are spurred by this new knowledge.  Without well-written scientific reports, scientists would not be able to effectively communicate findings.  Written reports allow new knowledge to be passed on through time, and to be evaluated by contemporary scientists working around the world.
>
>In general, the structure of a scientific report starts by introducing the topic being researched at a very broad level.  Then, the researcher will begin to introduce more specific ideas that provide the rationale and necessary context for why the study is being done.  This part involves a review of prior published scientific work that leads to the main question being asked.  Finally, the researcher describes the goal of the study, often times by posing a very specific question, or offering a hypothesis based on what is known from prior work.  The portion of the report described here that starts with a broad topic and ends with a specific hypothesis is typically called the "introduction."  Sometimes the introduction section also includes a very brief description of the approach that will be used to address the hypothesis.
>
> After the introduction most scientific reports move on to a description of the methods.  Typically, methods are written so that other experts in the field could reproduce the study if needed.  The writing styles of methods sections tend to vary among authors or even based on the guidelines set out by the particular journal.  Some are written in active voice.  For example, "we replicated our experiment ten times." And some are written in passive voice.  For example, "the experiment was replicated ten times."  In either case, the general scientific approach, as well as the very specific details are reported.  This includes what was done in the field or lab, in addition to how the data were to be analyzed.
>
> The results section follows the methods.  This is where the most specific information is given.  The introduction gets the reader from the broad field of study to the specific hypothesis or question being addressed.  The methods get more specific by citing how the hypothesis was tested.  In the results, the exact (usually numerical) results of the study or experiment are reported.  This section typically cites figures and/or tables presenting summaries of the data collected.  The results of any statistical analyses are also given.  The authors may also report whether results support their hypothesis or what other specific conclusions they do support.  The amount of interpretation of results in this section varies from author to author and from journal to journal, but generally results are simply stated and presented.
> 
> The  discussion section of a scientific paper is where results are interpreted.  Additionally, this section is where the specific nature of the results is interpreted in the context of the broader field from the introduction.  What do these results mean to the larger scientific community?  The discussion section typically ends with a conclusive or summary paragraph.  In this way the discussion section is the inverse of the introduction.  The introduction goes from the broader context to the specific hypothesis, whereas the discussion takes results supporting or refuting the specific hypothesis and flows back toward the broader implications of the findings and what other questions they lead to.
> 
> It should be noted that different journals have variations on these sections and their order.  For example, some journals go from an introduction straight into a results and discussion section, and then report a summary of the methods last.  Others may have separate sections for results, discussion, and conclusions. 
> 
> Every scientific report includes a section that lists references (sometimes referred to as literature cited).  While scientific journals may each use different conventions for parenthetical documentation (more about this later), they all include citations for facts and prior knowledge used in the study.  This includes information used to formulate the paper's introduction, previously developed methods adapted by the authors in their own methods, and information to support conclusions, interpretations, and implications posed in the discussion. 
> 
> Nearly all journals require authors to include an abstract.  Abstracts are usually under 300 words and are a complete synopsis of the work.  The format of abstracts varies.  Some journals require a bulleted or number list of points, some require one paragraph, others require an introduction/methods paragraph and a results/discussion paragraph, and some even require a visual abstract with very few words, instead including graphs and/or pictures that tell the story.  Readers use abstracts to help decide if the work is relevant to their work or literature review, so the point is that they are always brief compared to the whole paper.  Abstracts can be very difficult to write and are almost always the last part of the paper the authors complete.
> 
> In this course certain assignments will require students to write one or more of the sections of a scientific report described above.  For the purposes of this course we will adhere to the following scientific report sections as a convention:
> 
Abstract
Introduction
Methods
Results
Discussion
References
Scientific report writing is a skill that does not come easily, and is never perfected.  Every scientist must start somewhere.
